TOPIC 1️⃣ : The Cat Ate My Source Code

Take responsibility for yourself and your actions in terms of your career
advancement, your project, and your day-to-day work.

In addition to doing your own personal best, you must analyze the situation for risks that are beyond your control.

👉 TIP 3 : Provide Options, Don’t Make Lame Excuses

TOPIC 2️⃣ : Software Entropy

When disorder increases in software, programmers call it “software rot.”

The 'broken windows theory' applies to the field of software development as well.

👉 TIP 4 : Don’t Live with Broken Windows

Broken Windows : bad designs, wrong decisions, poor code, etc.

Neglect accelerates the rot faster than any other factor.

Don’t let entropy win.

One broken window—a badly designed piece of code, a poor management decision that the team must live with for the duration of the project—is all it takes to start the decline.

Even if there’s a fire raging (deadline, release date, trade show demo, etc.), you don’t want to be the first one to make a mess.

TOPIC 3️⃣ : Stone Soup and Boiled Frogs

The 'stone soup' story.

You may be in a situation where you know exactly what needs doing and how to do it. The entire system just appears before your eyes—you know it’s right. But ask permission to tackle the whole thing and you’ll be met with delays and blank stares. People will form committees, budgets will need approval, and things will get complicated. Everyone will guard their own resources. Sometimes this is called “start-up fatigue.”
It’s time to bring out the stones. Work out what you can reasonably ask for. Develop it well. Once you’ve got it, show people, and let them marvel. Then say “of course, it would be better if we added .” Pretend it’s not important. Sit back and wait for them to start asking you to add the functionality you originally wanted. People find it easier to join an ongoing success. Show them a glimpse of the future and you’ll get them to rally around.
(learn from the soilders of the 'stone soup' story)

👉 TIP 5 : Be a Catalyst for Change

Projects slowly and inexorably get totally out of hand. Most software disasters start out too small to notice, and most project overruns happen a day at a time. Systems drift from their specifications feature by feature, while patch after patch gets added to a piece of code until there’s nothing of the original left. It’s often the accumulation of small things that breaks morale and teams.

In the 'stone soup' story, the villagers thought about the stones and forgot about the rest of the world.

👉 TIP 6 : Remember the Big Picture

Note that the frog’s problem (who is in a pot whose temperature is being raised gradually) is different from the broken windows issue discussed in Section 2. In the Broken Window Theory, people lose the will to fight entropy because they perceive that no one else cares. The frog just doesn’t notice the change.

Don’t be like the frog. Keep an eye on the big picture. Constantly review what’s happening around you, not just what you personally are doing.

TOPIC 4️⃣ : GOOD ENOUGH SOFTWARE

SUBTOPIC 1 : Involve Your Users in the Trade-Off

It would be unprofessional to ignore these users’ requirements simply to add new features to the program, or to polish up the code just one more time.

The scope and quality of the system you produce should be specified as part of that system’s requirements.

👉 TIP 7 : Make Quality a Requirements Issue

Great software today is often preferable to perfect software tomorrow. If you give your users something to play with early, their feedback will often lead you to a better eventual solution.

SUBTOPIC 2 : Know When to Stop

Don’t spoil a perfectly good program by overembellishment and overrefinement. Move on, and let your code stand in its own right for a while. It may not be perfect.

TOPIC 5️⃣ : Your Knowledge Portfolio

Your knowledge and experience are your most important professional assets.
Unfortunately, they’re expiring assets.
Given the speed at which Web-years fly by, this can happen pretty quickly.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Your Knowledge Portfolio

Knowledge Portfolio of a programmer consists of:
- all the facts a he/she knows about computing
- application domains he/she works in
- all his/her experience

SUBTOPIC 2 : Building Your Portfolio

Guidelines:

(1) Invest regularly
    - Invest in your knowledge portfolio regularly. Even if it’s just a small amount.

(2) Diversify
    - The more different things you know, the more valuable you are. 
    - Know the ins and outs of the particular technology you are working with currently. But don’t stop there. 
    - The more technologies you are comfortable with, the better you will be able to adjust to change.

(3) Manage risk
    - Technology exists along a spectrum from risky, potentially high-reward to low-risk, low-reward standards.
    - Don’t put all your technical eggs in one basket.

(4) Buy low sell high
    - Learning an emerging technology before it becomes popular can be just as hard as finding an undervalued stock, but the payoff can be just as rewarding.

(5) Review and rebalance
    - Because it is a very dynamic industry.

👉 TIP 8 : Invest Regularly in Your Knowledge Portfolio
(Of all the guidelines, its the simplest and the most important one.)

SUBTOPIC 3 : GOALS

To acquire intellectual capital to fund your knowledge portfolio:
- Learn at least one new language every year.
- Read a technical book each quarter.
- Read nontechnical books, too. (Don’t forget the human side of the equation.)
- Take classes.
- Participate in local user groups. (Isolation can be deadly to your career. Find out what people are working on outside of your company.)
- Experiment with different environments.
- Stay current. (Subscribe to trade magazines and other journals.)
- Get wired.

- The cross-pollination of ideas is important; try to apply the lessons you’ve learned to your current project. Even if your project doesn’t use that technology, perhaps you can borrow some ideas. 

SUBTOPIC 4 : Opportunities for Learning

- Talking to other people will help build your personal network, and you may surprise yourself by finding solutions to other, unrelated problems along the way.

SUBTOPIC 5 : Critical Thinking

👉 TIP 9 : Critically Analyze What You Read and Hear

🔗 Care and Cultivation of Gurus (PAGE 17 in the book)

TOPIC 6️⃣ : Communicate!

- Having the best ideas, the finest code, or the most pragmatic thinking is ultimately sterile unless you can communicate with other people. A good idea is an orphan without effective communication.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Know What You Want to Say

Plan what you want to say. Write an outline. Then ask yourself, “Does this get across whatever I’m trying to say?” Refine it until it does.

This approach is not just applicable to writing documents. When you’re faced with an important meeting or a phone call with a major client, jot down the ideas you want to communicate, and plan a couple of strategies for getting them across.

SUBTOPIC 2 : Know Your Audience

You’re communicating only if you’re conveying information. To do that, you need to understand the needs, interests, and capabilities of your audience.

By making the appropriate pitch to each group, you’ll get them all excited about your project.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Choose Your Moment

Sometimes all it takes is the simple question “Is this a good time to talk about...?”

🔗 The WISDOM acrostic—understanding an audience (Page 20 in the book)

SUBTOPIC 4 : Choose a Style

Remember, however, that you are half of the communication transaction. If someone says they need a paragraph describing something and you can’t see any way of doing it in less than several pages, tell them so. Remember, that kind of feedback is a form of communication, too.

SUBTOPIC 5 : Make It Look Good

SUBTOPIC 6 : Involve Your Audience

If possible, involve your readers with early drafts of your document. Get their feedback, and pick their brains. You’ll build a good working relationship,and you’ll probably produce a better document in the process.

SUBTOPIC 7 : Be a Listener

Even if this is a situation where you have all the  information, even if this is a formal meeting with you standing in front of 20 suits—if you don’t listen to them, they won’t listen to you.

SUBTOPIC 8 : Get Back to People

Always respond to e-mails and voice mails, even if the response is simply “I’ll get back to you later.” Keeping people informed makes them far more forgiving of the occasional slip, and makes them feel that you haven’t forgotten them.

👉 TIP 10 : It’s Both What You Say and the Way You Say It

The more effective is your communication, the more influential you become.

⏸️ Page 50 : Chapter 2