📍 The Evils of Duplication : warns us not to duplicate knowledge throughout our systems

📍 Orthogonality : not to split any one piece of knowledge across multiple system components

PART 1️⃣ (7️⃣) : The Evils of Duplication

Maintenance is not a discrete activity, but a routine part of the entire development process.

We feel that the only way to develop software reliably, and to make ourdevelopments easier to understand and maintain, is to follow the DRY principle:
EVERY PIECE OF KNOWLEDGE MUST HAVE A SINGLE, UNAMBIGUOUS, AUTHORITATIVE REPRESENTATION WITHIN A SYSTEM.

👉 TIP 11 : DRY—Don’t Repeat Yourself

SUBTOPIC 1 : How Does Duplication Arise?

- Imposed duplication
  - Developers feel they have no choice—the environment seems to require duplication.
- Inadvertent duplication
  - Developers don’t realize that they are duplicating information.
- Impatient duplication
  - Developers get lazy and duplicate because it seems easier.
- Interdeveloper duplication
  - Multiple people on a team (or on different teams) duplicate a piece of information.

SUBTOPIC 2 : Imposed Duplication 🔁

The DRY principle tells us to keep the low-level knowledge in the code, where it belongs, and reserve the comments for other, high-level explanations. Otherwise, we’re duplicating knowledge, and every change means changing both the code and the comments.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Inadvertent Duplication 🔁

SUBTOPIC 5 : Impatient Duplication 🔁

SUBTOPIC 3 : Interdeveloper Duplication 🔁

👉 TIP 12 : Make It Easy to Reuse.

PART 2️⃣ (8️⃣) : Orthogonality

SUBTOPIC 1 : What Is Orthogonality?

Two lines are orthogonal if they meet at right angles. In vector terms, the two lines are independent. Move along one of the lines, and your position projected onto the other doesn’t change.

Two or more things are orthogonal if changes in one do not affect any of the others. In a well-designed system, the database code will be orthogonal to the user interface: you can change the interface without affecting the database, and swap databases without changing the interface.

SUBTOPIC 2 : A Nonorthogonal System

Helicopter controls are decidedly not orthogonal.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Benefits of Orthogonality

As the helicopter example illustrates, nonorthogonal systems are inherently more complex to change and control. When components of any system are highly interdependent, there is no such thing as a local fix.

👉 TIP 13 : Eliminate Effects Between Unrelated Things

We want to design components that are self-contained: independent, and with a single, well-defined purpose.

When components are isolated from one another, you know that you can change one without having to worry about the rest.

Benefits of writing orthogonal systems:
- increased prductivity
- reduced risk

SUBTOPIC 4 : Gain Productivity

SUBTOPIC 5 : Reduce Risk

Ways to apply the principle of orthogonality to your work:
- Project Teams
- Design
- Toolkits and libraries
- Coding

SUBTOPIC 6 : Project Teams

When teams are organized with lots of overlap, members are confused about responsibilities. Every change needs a meeting of the entire team, because any one of them might be affected.

You can get an informal measure of the orthogonality of a project team’s structure. Simply see how many people need to be involved in discussing each change that is requested. The larger the number, the less orthogonal the group. Clearly, an orthogonal team is more efficient.

SUBTOPIC 7 : Design

There is an easy test for orthogonal design. Once you have your components mapped out, ask yourself: If I dramatically change the requirements behind a particular function, how many modules are affected? In an orthogonal system, the answer should be “one.”

SUBTOPIC 8 : Toolkits and libraries 🔁

When you bring in a toolkit (or even a library from other members of your team), ask yourself whether it imposes changes on your code that shouldn’t be there.

SUBTOPIC 9 : Coding

Unless you constantly monitor not just what you are doing but also the larger context of the application, you might unintentionally duplicate functionality in some other module, or express existing knowledge twice.

Techniques to maintain orthogonality:
- Keep your code decoupled
- Avoid global data
- Avoid similar functions

SUBTOPIC 10 : Documentation

Orthogonality also applies to documentation. The axes are content and presentation. With truly orthogonal documentation, you should be able to change the appearance dramatically without changing the content.

SUBTOPIC 11 : Living with Orthogonality

With DRY, you’re looking to minimize duplication within a system, whereas with orthogonality you reduce the interdependency among the system’s components.
If you use the principle of orthogonality, combined closely with the DRY principle, you’ll find that the systems you develop are more flexible, more understandable, and easier to debug, test, and maintain.

TOPIC 3️⃣ (9️⃣) : Reversibility

With every critical decision, the project team commits to a smaller target—a narrower version of reality that has fewer options.
By the time many critical decisions have been made, the target becomes so small that if it moves, or the wind changes direction, or a butterfly in Tokyo flaps its wings, you miss. And you may miss by a huge amount.
The problem is that critical decisions aren’t easily reversible.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Reversibility

CASE STUDY:
Suppose you decide, early in the project, to use a relational database from vendor A. Much later, during performance testing, you discover that the database is simply too slow, but that the object database from vendor B is faster. With most conventional projects, you’d be out of luck. Most of the time, calls to third-party products are entangled throughout the code. But if you really abstracted the idea of a database out—to the point where it simply provides persistence as a service—then you have the flexibility to change horses in midstream.

The mistake lies in assuming that any decision is cast in stone—and in not preparing for the contingencies that might arise. Instead of carving decisions in stone, think of them more as being written in the sand at the beach. A big wave can come along and wipe them out at any time.

👉 TIP 14 : There Are No Final Decisions

SUBTOPIC 2 : Flexible Architecture

While many people try to keep their code flexible, you also need to think about maintaining flexibility in the areas of architecture, deployment, and vendor integration.

If you keep decisions soft and pliable, it won’t be hard at all. If you have poor encapsulation, high coupling, and hard-coded logic or parameters in the code, it might be impossible.

Whatever mechanism you use, make it reversible. If something is added automatically, it can be taken out automatically as well.

TOPIC 4️⃣ (🔟) : Tracer Bullets 🔁

SUBTOPIC 1 : Code That Glows in the Dark 🔁

👉 TIP 15 : Use Tracer Bullets to Find the Target

SUBTOPIC 2 : Tracer Bullets Don’t Always Hit Their Target 🔁

You use the technique in situations where you’re not 100% certain of where you’re going. You shouldn’t be surprised if your first couple of attempts miss: the user says “that’s not what I meant,” or data you need isn’t available when you need it, or performance problems seem likely. Work out how to change what you’ve got to bring it nearer the target, and be thankful that you’ve used a lean development methodology. A small body of code has low inertia—it is easy and quick to change. You’ll be able to gather feed back on your application and generate a new, more accurate version faster and at less cost than with any other method. And because every major application component is represented in your tracer code, your users can be confident that what they’re seeing is based on reality, not just a paper specification

SUBTOPIC 3 : Tracer Code versus Prototyping 🔁

TOPIC 5️⃣ (1️⃣1️⃣) : Prototypes and Post-it Notes

We can target a prototype to test one or more specific aspects of a project.

Post-it notes are great for prototyping dynamic things such as workflow and application logic. A user interface can be prototyped as a drawing on a whiteboard, as a nonfunctional mock-up drawn with a paint program, or with an interface builder.

Prototypes are designed to answer just a few questions, so they are much cheaper and faster to develop than applications that go into production. The code can ignore unimportant details—unimportant to you at the moment, but probably very important to the user later on. If you are prototyping a GUI, for instance, you can get away with incorrect results or data. On the other hand, if you’re just investigating computational or performance aspects, you can get away with a pretty poor GUI, or perhaps even no GUI at all.
But if you find yourself in an environment where you cannot give up the details, then you need to ask yourself if you are really building a prototype at all. Perhaps a tracer bullet style of development would be more appropriate in this case.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Things to Prototype

Anything that carries risk. Anything that hasn’t been tried before, or that is absolutely critical to the final system. Anything unproven, experimental, or doubtful. Anything you aren’t comfortable with. 

Prototyping is a learning experience. Its value lies not in the code produced, but in the lessons learned.

👉 TIP 16 : Prototype to Learn

SUBTOPIC 2 : How to Use Prototypes

While building a prototype, we can ignore:
- correctness : use dummy data where appropriate
- completeness : it may function only in a very limited sense
- robustness : error checking may be incomplete/missing
- style : don't document the prototype; document what you learned from it

SUBTOPIC 3 : Prototyping Architecture

specific areas to look for in the architectural prototype:
- Are the responsibilities of the major components well defined and appropriate?
- Are the collaborations between major components well defined?
- Is coupling minimized?
- Can you identify potential sources of duplication?
- Are interface definitions and constraints acceptable?
- Does every module have an access path to the data it needs during execution? Does it have that access when it needs it?

SUBTOPIC 4 : How Not to Use Prototypes

If you feel there is a strong possibility in your environment or culture that the purpose of prototype code may be misinterpreted, you may be better off with the tracer bullet approach.

When used properly, a prototype can save you huge amounts of time, money, pain, and suffering by identifying and correcting potential problem spots early in the development cycle—the time when fixing mistakes is both cheap and easy.

TOPIC 6️⃣ (1️⃣2️⃣) : Domain Languages

👉 TIP 17 : Program Close to the Problem Domain

By coding at a higher level of abstraction, you are free to concentrate on solving domain problems, and can ignore petty implementation details.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Implementing a Mini-Language 🔁

SUBTOPIC 2 : Data Languages and Imperative Languages 🔁

SUBTOPIC 3 : Stand-Alone and EmbeddedLanguages 🔁

SUBTOPIC 4 : Easy Development or Easy Maintenance? 🔁

TOPIC 7️⃣ (1️⃣3️⃣) : Estimating

By learning to estimate, and by developing this skill to the point where you have an intuitive feel for the magnitudes of things, you will be able to show an apparent magical ability to determine their feasibility.

👉 TIP 18 : Estimate to Avoid Surprises

SUBTOPIC 1 : How Accurate Is Accurate Enough?

One of the interesting things about estimating is that the units you use make a difference in the interpretation of the result.
“about 130 days” probably implies a higher degree of accuracy than "about 6 months"

Choose the units of your answer to reflect the accuracy you intend to convey.

SUBTOPIC 2 : Where Do Estimates Come From?

A basic estimating trick that always gives good answers: ask someone who’s already done it.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Understand What’s Being Asked?

The first part of any estimation exercise is building an understanding of what’s being asked. As well as the accuracy issues. You need to have a grasp of the scope of the domain. Often this is implicit in the question, but you need to make it a habit to think about the scope before starting to guess. Often, the scope you choose will form part of the answer you give: “Assuming there are no traffic accidents and there’s gas in the car, I should be there in 20 minutes.

SUBTOPIC 4 : Build a Model of the System

This is the fun part of estimating. From your understanding of the question being asked, build a rough and ready bare-bones mental model. If you’re estimating response times, your model may involve a server and some kind of arriving traffic. For a project, the model may be the steps that your organization uses during development, along with a very rough picture of how the system might be implemented
Often, the process of building the model leads to discoveries of underlying patterns and processes that weren’t apparent on the surface.
Building the model introduces inaccuracies into the estimating process. This is inevitable, and also beneficial.

SUBTOPIC 5 : Break the Model into Components

You’ll find that each component will typically have parameters that affect how it contributes to the overall model. At this stage, simply identify each parameter.

SUBTOPIC 6 : Give Each Parameter a Value

Once you have the parameters broken out, you can go through and assign each one a value. You expect to introduce some errors in this step. The trick is to work out which parameters have the most impact on the result, and concentrate on getting them about right. 

In fact, you’ll often find yourself basing an estimate on other subestimates. This is where your largest errors will creep in.

SUBTOPIC 7 : Calculate the Answers

As the systems get more complex, you’ll want to hedge your answers. Run multiple calculations, varying the values of the critical parameters, until you work out which ones really drive the model.
”The response time is roughly three quarters of a second if the system has a SCSI bus and 64MB memory, and one second with 48MB memory.”

During the calculation phase, you may start getting answers that seem  strange. Don’t be too quick to dismiss them. If your arithmetic is correct, your understanding of the problem or your model is probably wrong. This is valuable information.

SUBTOPIC 8 : Keep Track of Your Estimating Prowess

When an estimate turns out wrong, don’t just shrug and walk away. Find out why it differed from your guess. Maybe you chose some parameters that didn’t match the reality of the problem. Maybe your model was wrong. Whatever the reason, take some time to uncover what happened. If you do, your next estimate will be better.

SUBTOPIC 9 : Estimating Project Schedules

The normal rules of estimating can break down in the face of the complexities and vagaries of a sizable application development. 
The only way to determine the timetable for a project is by gaining experience on that same project.

Initially, you may have only a vague idea of how many iterations will be required, or how long they may be. Unless you are doing an application similar to a previous one, with the same team and the same technology, you’d just be guessing.
So you complete the coding and testing of the initial functionality and mark this as the end of the first increment. Based on that experience, you can refine your initial guess on the number of iterations. The refinement gets better and better each time, and confidence in the schedule grows along with it.

👉 TIP 19 : Iterate the Schedule with the Code

By (i) formalizing that the team, their productivity, and the environment will determine the schedule and (ii) refining the schedule as part of each iteration, you’ll be giving them the most accurate scheduling estimates you can

SUBTOPIC 10 : What to Say When Asked for an Estimate?

You say “I’ll get back to you.” You almost always get better results if you slow the process down and spend some time going through the steps.Estimates given at the coffee machine will (like the coffee) come back to haunt you.

⏸️ Page 96 : Chapter 3 : The Basic Tools