Tools amplify your talent. The better your tools, and the better you know how to use them, the more productive you can be. As you gain experience, and as you come across special requirements, you’ll add to this basic set. Always be on the lookout for better ways of doing things. If you come across a situation where you feel your current tools can’t cut it, make a note to look for something different or more powerful that would have helped. Let need drive your acquisitions.

TOPIC 1️⃣ (1️⃣4️⃣) : The Power of Plain Text

The best format for storing knowledge persistently is plain text.

SUBTOPIC 1 : What Is Plain Text?

👉 TIP 20 : Keep Knowledge in Plain Text

SUBTOPIC 2 : Drawbacks

There are two major drawbacks to using plain text: (1) It may take more space to store than a compressed binary format, and (2) it may be computationally more expensive to interpret and process a plain text file.

SUBTOPIC 3 : The Power of Text

The benefits:
- Insurance against obsolescence
- Leverage
- Easier testing

(1) Insurance Against Obsolescence
- Human-readable forms of data, and self-describing data, will outlive all other forms of data and the applications that created them. As long as the data survives, you will have a chance to be able to use it.
- You can parse such a file with only partial knowledge of its format; with most binary files, you must know all the details of the entire format in order to parse it successfully.

(2) Leverage
- Virtually every tool in the computing universe, can operate on plain text.

(3) Easier Testing
If you use plain text to create synthetic data to drive system tests, then it is a simple matter to add, update, or modify the test data without having to create any special tools to do so. Similarly, plain text output from regression tests can be trivially analyzed (with diff, for instance) or subjected to more thorough scrutiny with Perl, Python, or some other scripting tool.

SUBTOPIC 4 : Lowest Common Denominator

You need to ensure that all parties can communicate using a common standard. Plain text is that standard.

🔬 What does the author mean by 'Lowest Common Denominator'?
- The phrase "lowest common denominator" is an idiom that means the most basic, universally shared trait among a diverse group.

TOPIC 2️⃣ (1️⃣5️⃣) : Shell Games

If you do all your work using GUIs, you are missing out on the full capabilities of your environment. You won’t be able to automate common tasks, or use the full power of the tools available to you. And you won’t be able to combine your tools to create customized macro tools. A benefit of GUIs is WYSIWYG—what you see is what you get. The disadvantage is WYSIAYG—what you see is all you get.

GUI environments are normally limited to the capabilities that their designers intended. If you need to go beyond the model the designer provided, you are usually out of luck—and more often than not, you do need to go beyond the model.

👉 TIP 21 : Use the Power of Command Shells

Play around with your command shell, and you’ll be surprised at how much more productive it makes you.

SUBTOPIC 1 : Shell Utilities and Windows Systems

TOPIC 3️⃣ (1️⃣6️⃣) : Power Editing

SUBTOPIC 1 : One Editor

👉 TIP 22 : Use a Single Editor Well

Choose an editor, know it thoroughly, and use it for all editing tasks. If you use a single editor (or set of keybindings) across all text editing activities, you don’t have to stop and think to accomplish text manipulation: the necessary keystrokes will be a reflex.

SUBTOPIC 2 : Editor Features

SUBTOPIC 3 : Productivity

SUBTOPIC 4 : Where to Go from Here

SUBTOPIC 5 : What editors are available?

TOPIC 4️⃣ (1️⃣7️⃣) : Source Code Control

With a properly configured source code control system, you can always go back to a previous version of your software.

👉 TIP 23 : Always Use Source Code Control

SUBTOPIC 1 : Source CodeControl and Builds 🔁

SUBTOPIC 2 : But My Team Isn’t Using Source Code Control

Use one freely available source code control system, and make a point of keeping your personal work safely tucked into a repository (as well as doing what ever your project requires). Although this may seem to be duplication of effort, we can pretty much guarantee it will save you grief (and save your project money) the first time you need to answer questions such as “What did you do to the xyz module?” and “What broke the build?”

TOPIC 5️⃣ (1️⃣8️⃣) : Debugging

SUBTOPIC 1 : Psychology of Debugging

👉 TIP 24 : Fix the Problem, Not the Blame

It doesn’t really matter whether the bug is your fault or someone else’s. It is still your problem.

SUBTOPIC 2 : A Debugging Mindset

👉 TIP 25 : Don’t Panic (the first rule of debugging)

Beware of myopia when debugging. Resist the urge to fix just the symptoms you see: it is more likely that the actual fault may be several steps removed from what you are observing, and may involve a number of other related things. Always try to discover the root cause of a problem, not just this particular appearance of it.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Where to Start

Routinely set compiler warning levels as high as possible. It doesn’t make sense to waste time trying to find a problem that the compiler could find for you! We need to concentrate on the harder problems at hand.

Artificial tests don’t exercise enough of an application. You must brutally test both boundary conditions and realistic end-user usage patterns. 

SUBTOPIC 4 : Debugging Strategies

SUBTOPIC 5 : Visualize Your Data

Often, the easiest way to discern what a program is doing—or what it is going to do—is to get a good look at the data it is operating on.

But you can gain a much deeper insight into your data by using a debugger that allows you to visualize your data and all of the inter relationships that exist.

SUBTOPIC 6 : Tracing

Tracing statements are those little diagnostic messages you print to the screen or to a file that say things such as “got here” and “value of x = 2.” It’s a primitive technique compared with IDE-style debuggers, but it is peculiarly effective at diagnosing several classes of errors that debuggers can’t. Tracing is invaluable in any system where time itself is a factor: concurrent processes, real-time systems, and event-based applications.

Trace messages should be in a regular, consistent format; you may want to parse them automatically.

SUBTOPIC 7 : Rubber Ducking

The simple act of explaining, step by step, what the code is supposed to do often causes the problem to leap off the screen and announce itself.
It sounds simple, but in explaining the problem to another person you must explicitly state things that you may take for granted when go ing through the code yourself. By having to verbalize some of these assumptions, you may suddenly gain new insight into the problem.

SUBTOPIC 8 : Process of Elimination

👉 TIP 26 : “select” Isn’t Broken

If, however, you have no obvious place to start looking, you can always rely on a good old-fashioned binary search. See if the symptoms are present at either of two far away spots in the code. Then look in the middle. If the problem is present, then the bug lies between the start and the middle point; otherwise, it is between the middle point and the end. You can continue in this fashion until you narrow down the spot sufficiently to identify the problem.

SUBTOPIC 9 : The Element of Surprise

The amount of surprise you feel when something goes wrong is directly proportional to the amount of trust and faith you have in the code being run. That’s why, when faced with a “surprising” failure, you must realize that one or more of your assumptions is wrong. Don’t gloss over a routine or piece of code involved in the bug because you “know” it works. Prove it. Prove it in this context, with this data, with these boundary conditions.

👉 TIP 27 : Don’t Assume It—Prove It

When you come across a surprise bug, beyond merely fixing it, you need to determine why this failure wasn’t caught earlier. Consider whether you need to amend the unit or other tests so that they would have caught it.

Also, if the bug is the result of bad data that was propagated through a couple of levels before causing the explosion, see if better parameter checking in those routines would have isolated it earlier.

While you’re at it, are there any other places in the code that may be susceptible to this same bug? Now is the time to find and fix them.

If it took a long time to fix this bug, ask yourself why. Is there anything you can do to make fixing this bug easier the next time around?

Finally, if the bug is the result of someone’s wrong assumption, discuss the problem with the whole team: if one person misunderstands, then it’s possible many people do

🔗 Debugging Checklist (PAGE 78 in the book)

TOPIC 6️⃣ (1️⃣9️⃣) Text Manipulation 🔁

👉 TIP 28 : Learn a Text Manipulation Language

TOPIC 7️⃣ (2️⃣0️⃣) Code Generators

👉 TIP 29 : Write Code That Writes Code

SUBTOPIC 1 : Passive Code Generators

They  are run once to produce a result. From that point forward, the result becomes freestanding—it is divorced from the code generator. 

They save typing. They are basically parameterized templates, generating a given output from a set of inputs. Once the result is produced, it becomes a full-fledged source file in the project; it will be edited, compiled, and placed under source control just like any other file. Its origins will be forgotten

SUBTOPIC 2 : Active Code Generators

With an active code generator, you can take a single representation of some piece of knowledge and convert it into all the forms your application needs. This is not duplication, because the derived forms are disposable, and are generated as needed by the code generator (hence the word active)

Whenever you find yourself trying to get two disparate environments to work together, you should consider using active code generators.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Code Generators Needn’t Be Complex

Keep the input format simple, and the code generator becomes simple.

SUBTOPIC 4 : Code Generators Needn’t Generate Code

You can use code generators to write just about any output: HTML, XML, plain text—any text that might be an input somewhere else in your project.

⏸️ PAGE 132 : Chapter 4 : Pragmatic Paranoia