👉 TIP 30 : You Can’t Write Perfect Software

Pragmatic Programmers code in defenses against their own mistakes.

TOPIC 1️⃣ (2️⃣1️⃣) : Design by Contract

One of the best solutions for ensuring plain dealing is the contract.

A contract defines your rights and responsibilities, as well as those of the other party. In addition, there is an agreement concerning repercussions if either party fails to abide by the contract.

SUBTOPIC 1 : DBC (Design by Contract) 🔁

It is a simple yet powerful technique that focuses on documenting (and agreeing to) the rights and responsibilities of software modules to ensure program correctness.

What is a correct program? One that does no more and no less than it claims to do. Documenting and verifying that claim is the heart of Design by Contract.

👉 TIP 31 : Design with Contracts

Be strict in what you will accept before you begin, and promise as little as possible in return. Remember, if your contract indicates that you’ll accept anything and promise the world in return, then you’ve got a lot of code to write!

SUBTOPIC 2 : Implementing DBC

The greatest benefit of using DBC may be that it forces the issue of requirements and guarantees to the forefront. Simply enumerating at design time what the input domain range is, what the boundary conditions are, and what the routine promises to deliver—or, more importantly, what it doesn’t promise to deliver—is a huge leap forward in writing better software. By not stating these things, you are back to programming by coincidence (see page 172), which is where many projects start, finish, and fail.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Assertions

SUBTOPIC 4 : Language support

SUBTOPIC 5 : DBC and Crashing Early

SUBTOPIC 6 : Other uses of Invariants

(i) Loop Variants
(ii) Semantic Invariants

SUBTOPIC 7 : Dynamic Contracts and Agents

TOPIC 2️⃣ (2️⃣2️⃣) : Dead Programs Tell No Lies

👉 TIP 32 : Crash Early

SUBTOPIC 1 : Crash, Don’t Trash

One of the benefits of detecting problems as soon as you can is that you can crash earlier. And many times, crashing your program is the best thing you can do.

When your code discovers that something that was supposed to be impossible just happened, your program is no longer viable. Any thing it does from this point forward becomes suspect, so terminate it as soon as possible. A dead program normally does a lot less damage than a crippled one.

TOPIC 3️⃣ (2️⃣3️⃣) : Assertive Programming

👉 TIP 33 : If It Can’t Happen, Use Assertions to Ensure That It Won’t

Whenever you find yourself thinking “but of course that could never happen,” add code to check it. The easiest way to do this is with assertions.

Your first line of defense is checking for any possible error, and your second is using assertions to try to detect those you’ve missed.

Turning off assertions when you deliver a program to production is like crossing a high wire without a net because you once made it across in practice.

Even if you do have performance issues, turn off only those assertions that really hit you.

TOPIC 4️⃣ (2️⃣4️⃣) : When to Use Exceptions

SUBTOPIC 1 : What is Exceptional? 🔁

👉 TIP 34 : Use Exceptions for Exceptional Problems

SUBTOPIC 2 : Error Handlers Are an Alternative 🔁

⏸️ PAGE 154 : TOPIC 5️⃣ (2️⃣5️⃣) : How to Balance Resources
