The better your tools, and the better you know how to use them, the more productive you can be.
Always be on the lookout for better ways of doing things.
If you come across a situation where you feel your current tools can’t cut it, make a note to look for something different or more powerful that would have helped.

PART 1️⃣ (1️⃣4️⃣) : The Power of Plain Text

The best format for storing knowledge persistently is plain text. With plain text, we give ourselves the ability to manipulate knowledge, both manually and programmatically.

Plain text is often superior to binary formats for long-term usefulness and interoperability.

Ⓜ️ 01-why-not-binary-format-instead-of-plain-text.md

👉 TIP 20 : Keep Knowledge in Plain Text

SUBTOPIC 1 : Drawbacks

In comparison to plain text, binary/structured machine-friendly formats that are cheaper to process.

Ⓜ️ 02-metadata-in-plain-text-and-encryption-or-hashing-for-configuration-parameters-safety.md

SUBTOPIC 2 : The Power of Text

Benefits of plain text:
- Insurance against obsolescence
- Leverage
- Easier testing

Ⓜ️ 03-unix-philosophy.md

SUBTOPIC 3 : Lowest Common Denominator

In diverse systems where many different technologies must communicate, plain text remains the universal common language because compatibility and interoperability matter more than raw efficiency.

PART 2️⃣ (1️⃣5️⃣) : Shell Games

👉 TIP 21 : Use the Power of Command Shells

Gain familiarity with the shell, and you’ll find your productivity soaring.

PART 2️⃣ (1️⃣6️⃣) : Power Editing

SUBTOPIC 1 : One Editor

👉 TIP 22 : Use a Single Editor Well

SUBTOPIC 2 : Editor Features

SUBTOPIC 3 : Productivity

SUBTOPIC 4 : Where to Go from Here

PART 3️⃣ (1️⃣7️⃣) : Source Code Control

SCCS lets us safely develop future versions while maintaining current releases, using branches and merges to manage parallel work.

👉 TIP 22 : Always Use Source Code Control

Ⓜ️ 04-manual-build-process-vs-automated-build.md

PART 4️⃣ (1️⃣8️⃣) : Debugging

SUBTOPIC 1 : Psychology of Debugging

👉 TIP 24 : Fix the Problem, Not the Blame

SUBTOPIC 2 : A Debugging Mindset

You need to turn off many of the defenses you use each day to protect your ego, tune out any project pressures you may be under, and get yourself comfortable.

First rule of debugging is not to panic.

👉 TIP 25 : Don't Panic

Always try to discover the root cause of a problem, not just this particular appearance of it.

SUBTOPIC 3 : Where to Start

Set compiler warning levels as high as possible. It doesn’t make sense to waste time trying to find a problem that the compiler could find for you!

Artificial tests don’t exercise enough of an application. You must brutally test both boundary conditions and realistic end-user usage patterns. You need to do this systematically.

SUBTOPIC 4 : Debugging Strategies

SUBTOPIC 5 : Visualize Your Data

Often, the easiest way to discern what a program is doing—or what it is going to do—is to get a good look at the data it is operating on.

SUBTOPIC 6 : Tracing

Ⓜ️ 05-tracing.md

SUBTOPIC 7 : Rubber Ducking

A very simple but particularly useful technique for finding the cause of a problem is simply to explain it to someone else.
The simple act of explaining, step by step, what the code is supposed to do often causes the problem to leap off the screen and announce itself.
In explaining the problem to another person you must explicitly state things that you may take for granted when going through the code yourself

SUBTOPIC 8 : Process of Elimination

👉 TIP 26 : “select” Isn’t Broken

Don’t upgrade important external dependencies right before your product release unless you have enough time to test everything again.

If, however, you have no obvious place to start looking, you can always rely on a good old-fashioned binary search.

SUBTOPIC 9 : The Element of Surprise

The amount of surprise you feel when something goes wrong is directly proportional to the amount of trust and faith you have in the code being run. That’s why, when faced with a “surprising” failure, you must realize that one or more of your assumptions is wrong. Don’t gloss over a routine or piece of code involved in the bug because you “know” it works. Prove it. Prove it in this context, with this data, with these boundary conditions.

👉 TIP 27 : Don’t Assume It—Prove It

When you come across a surprise bug, beyond merely fixing it, you need to determine why this failure wasn’t caught earlier. Consider whether you need to amend the unit or other tests so that they would have caught it.

If the bug is the result of bad data that was propagated through a couple of levels before causing the explosion, see if better parameter checking in those routines would have isolated it earlier.

While you’re at it, are there any other places in the code that may be susceptible to this same bug? Now is the time to find and fix them.

If it took a long time to fix this bug, ask yourself why. Is there anything you can do to make fixing this bug easier the next time around?

If the bug is the result of someone’s wrong assumption, discuss the problem with the whole team: if one person misunderstands, then it’s possible many people do.

Debugging Checklist
- Is the problem being reported a direct result of the underlying bug, or merely a symptom?
- Is the bug really in the compiler? Is it in the OS? Or is it in your code?
- If you explained this problem in detail to a coworker, what would you say?
- If the suspect code passes its unit tests, are the tests complete enough? What happens if you run the unit test with this data?
- Do the conditions that caused this bug exist anywhere else in the system?

PART 5️⃣ (1️⃣9️⃣) : Text Manipulation

👉 TIP 28 : Learn a Text Manipulation Language

Use scripting/text manipulation tools to automate repetitive work and rapidly test ideas instead of overengineering everything in heavy languages.

If your task involves reading, transforming, generating, or stitching text/code/data, scripting languages are often the fastest solution.